## Denis Dawe

Living with my unemployed grandmother who supported me My mother was not part of my life and my Father past away in the early years when I was 6 years old. Life was tough for me…. Then my grandmother passed away after grade 6 and thus I had no support. I dropped out and found a job where I was working for other people just to earn money to buy food and clothes for myself and my cousins and sisters. I was out of school for 4 years. I then went back to school after four years to finish grade 6. I had no school clothes or shoes to wear for about 4 months. I could not sleep at night as this was so painful for me to bear. I was in a very dark emotional place of pain and sorrow. When I passed to grade 7 I decided to visit my mother who was living in town for the very first time. My mother was married but also unemployed. However, I could get some toiletries to use at school. Passed grade 7 with flying colors Grade 7 – 10 and passed grade 10 even though my marks were not so good. I then continued with my school career where I completed grade 12 despite all challenges. The principal would send all children back home without proper school uniform and proper shoes which caused me to miss about 3 weeks lessons. I then had to work in other people’s yards to get paid and buy school shoes. After I finished grade 12 I returned to the village and stayed for about one year. I then heard people talking about the San development program offered by the government so I inquired about the program as I could see hope in it. Eventually, I got assistance from the government and registered at Monotronics College where I completed my advanced diploma. Currently I am studying at IUM for my Bachelors Degree. What motivated you after 4 years to go back to school after you dropping out? • My friends whom I was schooling with motivated me: My biggest motivation was my friends that was in higher grades then me while I was stuck at the village. The same friends that I left in school when I dropped out pulled through and were in town and doing grade 10. I thought that if they can do it then so can I. I thought of my dream of becoming a teacher one day. • Teachers also motivated me to return to school: The teachers seeing me in the village were asking me why I am on the streets while I was the best learner in school. I had no answer to their question as it was shameful and too personal to talk about. The teachers were also helpful to support in anyway and advised me to revert back to them with any issues I would need them to help with. I was already 16 by the time I went back to school which was tough for me so I had the younger kids teasing and laughing at me all the time. But I never gave up as I had a dream to become someone in life.
