## Petronella

My story get me so emotional to an extent to cry. 1996 – Grade 1 – Grade 7 ( Finished grade 7) San people in that region were called by diferent names to make spectacle – Some kind of bullying which cause learners to drop out from school. People in general do not understand what San learners are going through. I was one of the best learners in school – I was the 2nd best. My perseverance to complete school was twofold: Firstly the fact that I was one of the best learners in school and secondly teachers motivating me helped me not to dropout. My teacher’s words were: “Keep on, Keep on. You are doing great. One day you will become someone great”; “Look at your background where you are coming from and strive for better.” Imagine, my entire childhood I was walking barefoot and only wore new shoes in 2009 for the first time in my life. Others were teasing me about how ugly my feet looked and comparing it to an elephant and this would sometimes make me cry as it made me feel inferior. My high school years were not easy either as I had to walk about 7 km to school and back daily. Starvation was a problem…. My parents were not employed…… They had to plough to get food but no cattle at all. Sometimes you could stay a whole week without eating but just drinking water and had to walk the long distance to school without eating. However, something drastically happened to me while in grade 10 that changed my life. Pregnancy forced me to drop out of school. I stayed home in the village for about two years. It bothered me that my friends passed grade 10 while I am wasting time sitting at home and no friend to talk to. The situation just got worse because now there is an extra person – the baby to feed and clothe as well. That’s when I’ve decided to go back to school to complete grade 10 after which I passed with flying colors. In my own opinion, I think San learners are brilliant but dropout because they don’t know it. Going to boarding school far from my parents was not easy and being bullied by others and feeling inferior was the usual for me. The financial struggles were so immense that the fellow learners would tease you about how poor you are. However, I persevered and passed grade 12. I then went to the city for tertiary education with the help of the government’s support program. We do appreciate what the government is doing by paying for our tuition fees.
