## Rocky

I started my school career in 2002 Grade 1 to 4 We attended class under a tree 2005 I moved to a school 12 km away from my house where I walked about 24km daily. We were faced by challenges especially during winter time as our parents couldn’t afford to buy us warm clothes to wear. We had to get up early in the morning and start to walk to school to get there in time. Sometimes we had to walk halfway and make a fire to warm up a bit before proceeding. We had to face the harsh cold weather condition barefoot or only wearing sandals. One great motivation was the school management who availed two of the classrooms for us to rather stay at school to avoid the lengthy walking distance. Hunger was another problem we were faced with …The school feeding program provided some maize-meal for us which was also not always available which forced us to sometimes hunt for birds or wild vegetables or fruits. Though, I never give up on myself but rather pushed through. The most exciting part was the fact that I was one of the best learners in school. I was fortunate to have been send to an urban school for grade 8 until I completed my grade 12. However, I was faced by another challenge where other fellow learners from wealthy families made fun of me not wearing nice clothes. Though what I kept on reminding myself is that education is the reason why I am in school. So I made a conscious decision to ignore them all. San are seen inferior to others in general in life and if you don’t have a heart like mine to ignore such you might fail. The government is giving support in terms of paying of studies, food and transport allowances but could be delayed in such a way to discourage you. My Parents, my motivation: My parents reminded me by referring back to their own life of suffering they had to endure because they did not have any education. They advise to me was to develop myself through education to have a better life just like any other individual out there. Furthermore, going to urban areas was a dream come true to any San child so the fact that my elder brother finished his secondary education in an urban school inspired me as this was one of my biggest dreams to also get to the urban towns to finish my studies. My perception of a town kept pushing me to go get my dream to one day live in a big town. This was the motivating factor to my school career success.
