## Evelyn

The school where I started my grade 1 only had up to grade 4 so I had to move to another school. Therefore, I had to move to another from grade 5 to grade 10 where we had to wake up early to walk a far distance as the school was quite far. This caused you to get to school a bit late and then you would be punished for late coming. Although we were punished, it never discouraged us to dropout of school. Punishment could be in the form of cleaning the school while others are attending classes which cause you to miss out on school work. Proper clothing and shoes was another challenge I had to face. I had to walk to school without waring any shoes while the sun was extremely hot. When I was in grade 10 one of the teachers from the lower grades offered to take me into her house and care to support me. This teacher was a big motivation as she kept on encouraging me to study on top of providing for my needs. She also advised my mother not to give up but to keep on encouraging me to complete school. Thanks to this teacher, I never gave up even when I failed grade 10 I went back to school and repeated grade 10. I then changed schools to do grade 11 and 12 and repeated grade 12 after failing the first time. Because of the move I did not have anyone like the teacher who used to support me which made it even harder for me to cope. Another good teacher felt sorry for me when he realized I am from the san community and offered his support with transport money back home. He further encouraged me not to give up. He told me his own life story about his educational career and how he also suffered but got success by becoming a teacher. He motivated me not to give up as I will get good opportunities when I finish my grade 12. After finishing grade 12 my brother told me about a program by the government that give support to further studies. With this assistance I enrolled at Lingua College where I completed my diploma and moved on the IUM for my degree.
