## Christian

I was raised by another lady not related to me and not my own mother which later took me back to my uncle where I was looking after my uncle’s cattle. My uncle only enrolled me in school when I was about 9 years old which was not a pleasant feeling to me as I was used to farming and was concerned about the cattle. So I started grade 1 eventually when I was 10 years of age and I was the taller than all other kids in my class. After completing grade 1, I was transferred to grade 6 as I was too mature for the class I was in. When I completed primary school and joined high school my life changed when I was introduced to alcohol and ladies which caused me to fail grade 8. I had to repeat grade 8 but could still not control my bad behavior and as a result got myself frequently expelled from school. In the meantime, the cattle I left at the farm also died so I realized that I do not have anything to fall back to if I had to lose my place in school. I had to take action and make a decision to part ways with my friends, which were a bad influence in my life. I started to focus more on my school career, passed grade 8 and 9, and unfortunately failed grade 10 due to emotional stress I was going through. This is the time I gave my life to God and became born again Christian. I then decided to look for a college where I can improve my points. I then approached the san counsel for assistance for my studies. A teacher from my previous school advised me how to repeat and keep on studying and keep myself busy daily and gave me a timetable to help me study. I tried to look for opportunities for work after failing grade 10 but it did not succeed. Back home in the village the san counsel advised me to make use of the program the government is providing for the san youth. I visited the office of NTA to see which college is authorized for me to approach to further my studies. I then got accepted at VTC to do auto mechanics even though my dream was to study ICT. The government paid for all fees and provided accommodation for us even though it was far and transportation was a challenge, which caused me to miss exams. I then changed to another college whereby I was accepted but had to write a general test for final acceptance. I failed the test about five times before I eventually got through, as I knew this is my dream. I passed my two-certification exams for A+ and N+ with flying colors and am currently doing PC engineering course with only one module before I will graduate. This makes me so happy to look back how I suffered with school and where I am now currently having achieved so much. Never give up in yourself but rather focus on who you are and where you see yourself in the future.
