## Dakes

I had a tough time during my school career, as my parents were often changing jobs frequently and had to move from one town to another. My physical health was another challenge that I had to face during my school lifecycle, as I could not always attend school due to illness. My parents later decided to keep me home ….. The owner of the farm where my parents worked was actually a medical doctor and advised them to send me to school, as I will be fine. I was then enrolled for grade 1 but had to move to another town after grade 5 again which was a challenge for to adapt and concentrate as some of my fellow learners started to bully me. Bully went to such an extent that my fellow learners were calling me names and discriminating me as a san but I finished grade 7 despite it all. I could not continue to grade eight due to financial challenges my parents faced that year. I eventually was enrolled in high school the following year and did very well until I got to grade 10 and met some friends with bad influence. I started to waste my time with girls and bad friends, which caused me to fail grade 10. Therefore, I dropped out and stayed home for about 3 year doing odd jobs just to survive. What motivated me to keep on was the way my parents were suffering scared me and I would not want to go live like them one day. That’s when I made up my mind to do something that will support me, which brought studies to my mind. I then heard about an opportunity to study in Windhoek so I made my way to the regional counsel for more clarity. I was then given the opportunity to go study in Windhoek but found it hard to get into a college as I failed grade 10. Eventually I got a college where I attended classes and successfully completed my diploma. I furthered my studies by doing Professional Web Design certificate after which I found a job and still in the process to further my studies.
